Polycarp of Smyrna, To the Philippians (Epistula ad Philippenses), chapters 9-14 incl. the Latin of 10-12, 13 end, 14.
Kirsopp Lake, The Apostolic Fathers I (Loeb, 1912). Internet Archive OCR (djvu.txt) excerpt from https://archive.org/details/TheApostolicFathersV1


πάντας ἐλεήμονες, ἐπιστρέφοντες τὰ ἀποπε- 
πλανημένα, ἐπισκεπτόμενοι πάντας ἀσθενεῖς, μὴ 
3 A 4 A 3 A Aa ’ > \ 
ἀμελοῦντες χηρας ἢ ὀρφανοῦ ἢ πένητος. ἀλλὰ 
προνοοῦντες ἀεὶ τοῦ καλοῦ ἐνῴπιον θεοῦ Kal 


2 


ἀνθρώπων, ἀπεχόμενοι πάσης ὀργῆς, προσωπο- 


Rom 12, 17) λῃψίας, κρίσεως ἀδίκου, μακρὰν ὄντες πάσης 


Kom. 14, 10. 


12 

cf. II Cor. 5 
10 

Ps. 2, 11; 
Heb. 12, 28 


φιλαργυρίας, μὴ ταχέως πιστεύοντες κατά τινος, 
μὴ ἀπότομοι ἐν κρίσει, εἰδότες ὅτι πάντες ὀφει- 
λέται ἐσμὲν ἁμαρτίας. 2. εἰ οὖν δεόμεθα τοῦ 
κυρίου, ἵνα ἡμῖν ἀφῇ, ὀφείλομεν καὶ ἡμεῖς 
ἀφιέναι" ἀπέναντι γὰρ τῶν τοῦ κυρίου καὶ θεοῦ 
ἐσμὲν ὀφθαλμῶν, καὶ πάντας δεῖ παραστῆναι 
τῷ βήματι τοῦ Χριστοῦ καὶ ἕκαστον ὑπὲρ αὐτοῦ 
λόγον δοῦναι. 8. οὕτως οὖν δουλεύσωμεν αὐτῷ 

\ ’ 4 3 ’, \ > A 
peta φόβου καὶ πάσης εὐλαβείας, καθὼς αὐτὸς 
ἐνετείλατο καὶ οἱ εὐαγγελισάμενοι ἡμᾶς ἀπόστολοι 
καὶ οἱ προφῆται, οἱ προκηρύξαντες τὴν ἔλευσιν τοῦ 
κυρίου ἡμῶν' ξηλωταὶ περὶ τὸ καλόν, ἀπεχόμενοι 
τῶν σκανδάλων καὶ τῶν ψευδαδέλφων καὶ τῶν 
ἐν ὑποκρίσει φερόντων τὸ ὄνομα τοῦ κυρίου, 
οἵτινες ἀποπλανῶσι κενοὺς ἀνθρώπους. 


290 


POLYCARP TO THE PHILIPPIANS, v. 3-vi. 3 


inherit the Kingdom of God,’ nor they who do 
iniquitous things. Wherefore it is necessary to re- 
frain from all these things, and to be subject to the 
presbyters and deacons as to God and Christ. The 
virgins must walk with a blameless and pure con- 
science. 


VI 


1. Anp let the presbyters also be compassionate, The duties 
merciful to all, bringing back those that have δος ΜΝ 
wandered, caring for all the weak, neglecting neither 
widow, nor orphan nor poor, but “ever providing for 
that which is good before Ged and man,” refraining 
from all wrath, respect of persons, unjust judgment, 
being far from all love of money, not quickly believing 
evil of any, not hasty in judgment, knowing that “ we 
all owe the debt of sin.” 1 2. If then we pray the 
Lord to forgive us, we also ought to forgive, for we Forgiveness 
stand before the eyes of the Lord and of God, and 
‘we must all appear before the judgment seat of 
Christ, and each must give an account of himself.” 

3. So then “let. us Serve him with fear and all 
reverence,’ as he himself commanded us, and The service 
as did the Apostles, who brought us the Gospel, * 44 
and the Prophets who foretold the coming of our 

Lord. Let us be zealous for good, refraining from 
offence, and from the false brethren, and from those 

who bear the name of the Lord in hypocrisy, 

who deceive empty-minded men. 


1 The introductory formula ‘‘ knowing that” renders it 
probable that these words are a quotation, but the source is 
unknown. 


291 


I Joh. 4,2. 8; 
II Joh. 7 


I Pet. 4, 7 
Mt. 6, 18 


Mt. 26. 41; 
Mk. 14, 88 


I Tim. 1,1 


I Pet. 2, 24 


I Pet, 2, 22 


THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS 


VII 


1. Πᾶς yap ὃς ἂν μὴ ὁμολογῇ ᾿Ιησοῦν 
Χριστὸν ἐν σαρκὶ ἐληλυθέναι, ἀντιχριστός ἐστιν" 
καὶ ὃς ἂν μὴ ὁμολογῇ τὸ μαρτύριον τοῦ σταυροῦ, 
ἐκ τοῦ διαβόλου ἐστίν" καὶ ὃς ἂν μεθοδεύῃ τὰ 
λόγια τοῦ κυρίου πρὸς τὰς ἰδίας ἐπιθυμίας καὶ 
λέγῃ μήτε ἀνάστασιν μήτε κρίσιν, οὗτος πρωτό- 
τοκός ἐστι τοῦ σατανᾶ. 2. διὸ ἀπολιπόντες 
τὴν ματαιότητα τῶν πολλῶν καὶ τὰς ψευδοδι- 
δασκαλίας ἐπὶ τὸν ἐξ ἀρχῆς ἡμῖν παραδοθέντα 
λόγον ἐπιστρέψωμεν, νήφοντες πρὸς τὰς εὐχὰς 
καὶ προσκαρτεροῦντες᾽ νηστείαις, δεήσεσιν αἰτού- 
μενοι τὸν παντεπόπτην θεὸν μὴ εἰσενεγκεῖν ἡμᾶς 
εἰς πειρασμόν, καθὼς εἶπεν ὁ κύριος" Τὸ μὲν 
πνεῦμα πρόθυμον, ἡ δὲ σὰρξ ἀσθενής. 


ΠῚ 


1. ᾿Αδιαλείπτως οὖν προσκαρτερῶμεν τῇ ἐλπίδι 
ἡμῶν καὶ τῷ ἀρραβῶνι τῆς: δικαιοσύνης ἡμῶν, ὅς 
ἐστι Χριστὸς ᾿Ιησοῦς, "ὃς ἀνήνεγκεν ἡμῶν τὰς 
ς A > 3 
ἁμαρτίας τῷ ἰδ σώματι ἐπὶ TO Europ, Os 
ἁμαρτίαν οὐκ ἐποίησεν, οὐδὲ εὑρέθη δόλος ἐν τῷ 
στόματι αὐτοῦ" ἀλλὰ δι’ ἡμᾶς, ἵνα ζήσωμεν ἐν 
αὐτῷ, πάντα ὑπέμεινεν. 2. μιμηταὶ οὖν γενώμεθα 
τῆς ὑπομονῆς αὐτοῦ, καὶ ἐὰν πάσχωμεν διὰ 
τὸ ὄνομα αὐτοῦ, δοξάξωμεν αὐτόν. τοῦτον γὰρ 
ἡμῖν τὸν ὑπογραμμὸν ἔθηκε δι’ ἑαυτοῦ, καὶ ἡμεῖς 
τοῦτο ἐπιστεύσαμεν. 


202 


POLYCARP TO THE PHILIPPIANS, vu. στ τ. 2 


VII 


1. “ For everyone who does not confess that Jesus Warning 
Christ has come in the flesh is an anti-Christ”’ ; and πρλοβθρὸν 
whosoever does not confess the testimony of the 
Cross is of the devil: and whosoever perverts the 
oracles of the Lord for his own lusts, and says that 
there is neither resurrection nor judgment,—this 
man is the first-born of Satan.1 2. Wherefore, leaving 
the foolishness of the crowd, and their false teaching, 
let us turn back to the word which was delivered to 
us in the beginning, “watching unto prayer” and 
persevering in fasting, beseeching the all-seeing 
God in our supplications “to lead us not into 
temptation,” even as the Lord said, “ The spirit is 
willing, but the flesh is weak.” 


VIII 


1. Ler us then persevere unceasingly in our hope, Porsever. 
and in the pledge of our righteousness, that is in 35:09 
Christ Jesus, “who bare our sins in his own body on 
the tree, who did no sin, neither was guile found in 
his mouth,” but for our sakes, that we might live in - 
him, he endured all things. 2. Let us then be 
imitators of his endurance, and if we suffer for his 
name’s sake let us glorify him. For this is the 
example which he gave us in himself, and this is 
what we have believed. 


1 This phrase, according to Irenaeus (Adv. Haer. iii. 3, 4.) 
was applied, presumably later, by Polycarp to Marcion. 


293 


THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS 


IX 


1. Παρακαλῶ οὖν πάντας ὑμᾶς, πειθαρχεῖν τῷ 
λόγῳ τῆς δικαιοσύνης ἰ καὶ ἀσκεῖν πᾶσαν ὑπο- 
μονήν, ἣν καὶ εἴδατε κατ᾽ ὀφθαλμοὺς οὐ μόνον ἐν 
τοῖς μακαρίοις ᾿Ιγνατίῳ καὶ Ζωσίμῳ καὶ Ῥούφῳ, 
ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐν ἄλλοις τοῖς ἐξ ὑμῶν καὶ ἐν αὐτῷ 
Παύλῳ καὶ τοῖς λοιποῖς ἀποστόλοις" 2. πεπεισ - 

Phil. 2, 16 μένους ὅτι οὗτοι πάντες οὐκ εἰς κενὸν ἔδραμον, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἐν πίστει καὶ δικαιοσύνῃ, καὶ ὅτι εἰς τὸν 

1 Clem. 5, 4 ὀφειλόμενον αὐτοῖς τόπον εἰσὶ παρὰ τῷ κυρίῳ, ᾧ 

II Tim, 4,10 καὶ συνέπαθον. οὐ γὰρ τὸν νῦν ἠγάπησαν αἰῶνα, 
ἀλλὰ τὸν ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν ἀποθανόντα καὶ δι’ ἡμᾶς" ὑπὸ 
τοῦ θεοῦ ἀναστάντα. 


Χ 


Col. 1, 23; ; 4 ‘ ee 
1 Cor.’15,'58 1. In his ergo state et domini exemplar sequimini, 


I Pet. 8, 8 (2, firmi in fide et immutabiles, fraternitatis amatores, 


Joh, 18, 8 84; diligentes invicem, in veritate sociati, mansuetudine 
5, 


eae 8 domini alterutri praestolantes, nullum despicientes. 


Tob, 4, 10; 2. Cum possitis benefacere, nolite differre, quia 
μ Φ Φ e 
I Pet. 5,5; eleémosyna de morte liberat. Omnes vobis invicem 


Eph. 5, 21 
subiecti estote, conversationem vestram_ irrepfensi- 


bilem habentes in gentibus, ut ex bonis operibus 
[ Pot. 2,12 vestris et vos laudem accipiatis et dominus in vobis 


1 9g λόγῳ τῆς δικαιοσύνης GL, om. Eus. 
2 Here G breaks off, but the rest of the sentence is given 
by L Eus. 


294 


POLYCARP TO THE PHILIPPIANS, ix. 1-x. 3 


IX 
1. Now I beseech you all to obey the word of 


righteousness, and to endure with all the endurance 
which you also saw before your eyes, not only in the 
blessed Ignatius, and Zosimus, and Rufus, but also in 
others among yourselves, and in Paul himself, and in 
the other Apostles; 2. being persuaded that all of 
these “ran not invain,’’ but in faith and righteousness, 
and that they are with the Lord in the “ place which 
is their due,’ with whom they also suffered. For 
they did not “love this present world” but him 
who died on our behalf, and was raised by God for 
our sakes, 


X 


The 
examples 
of the 
martyrs 


1. Sranp fast therefore in these things and follow Persever- 
the example of the Lord, ‘firm and unchangeable πα ΣΎ ΤΕ 
in faith, loving the brotherhood, affectionate to one PY "ἃ 


another,’ joined together in the truth, forestalling 
one another in the gentleness of the Lord, despising 
no man. 2. When you can do good defer it not, 
‘for almsgiving sets free from death; be ye all 
subject one to the other, having your conversation 
blameless among the Gentiles,” that you may receive 
praise “ for your good works”’ and that the Lord be 
not blasphemed in you. 3. “But woe to him 


295 


gvod works, 


Ta, 52, . 


Eph. 5, 5; 
Col, 8, 5 ° 
Jer. 5, 4 

I Cor. 6, 2 


Cf. Phil. 
4,15 


THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS 


non blasphemetur. 8. Vae autem, per quem nomen 
domini blasphematur. Sobrietatem ergo docete 
omnes, in qua et vos conversamini. 


XI 


1. Nimis contristatus sum_pro Valente, qui pres- 
byter factus est aliquando apud vos, quod sic igno- 
ret is locum qui datus est.ei. Moneo itaque ut 
abstineatis vos ab avaritia et sitis casti! veraces. 
Abstinete vos ab omni malo. 2. Qui autem non 
potest se in his gubernare, quomodo alii pronuntiat 
hoc? .Si quis non se abstinuerit ab avaritia, ab 
idololatria coinquinabitur et tamquam inter gentes 
iudicabitur, qui ignorant iudicium domini. Aut 
nescimus, quia sancti mundum iudicabunt?  sicut 
Paulus docet. 3. Ego autem nihil tale sensi in vobis 
vel audivi, in quibus laboravit beatus Paulus, qui 
estis in principio epistulae eius. De vobis etenim 


I! Thess. 1, 4 S/oriatur in omnibus ecclesiis, quae dominum? solae 


tunc cognoverant; nos autem nondum cognove- 
ramus. 4. Valde ergo, fratres, contristor pro illo et 


II Tim. 2,25 pro coniuge eius, quibus det dominus paenitentiam 


II Thess, 8, 
15 


veram. Sobrii ergo estote et vos in hoc; et non 
sicut inimicos tales existimetis, sed sicut passibilia 
membra et errantia eos revocate, ut omnium vestrum 
corpus salvetis. Hoc enim agentes vos ipsos 
aedificatis. 


1 An eé after casts would be natural, but it is only sound 
in two of the MSS of L. 
2 Some MSS. of L read deum instead of dominum. 


296 


POLYCARP TO THE PHILIPPIANS, x. 3-x1 4 


through whom the name of the Lord is blasphemed.” 
Therefore teach sobriety to all and show it forth in 
your own lives, 


XI 


1. I am deeply sorry for Valens, who was once Valens 
made a presbyter among you, that he so little under- 
stands the place which was given to him. I advise, 
therefore, that you keep from avarice, and be pure 
_and truthful. Keep yourselves from all evil. 2. For against 
how may he who cannot attain self-control in these *Y™° 
matters enjoin it on another? If any man does not ᾿ 
abstain from avarice he will be defiled by idolatry, 
and shall be judged as if he were among the Gentiles 
who “ know not the judgment of God.” Or do we 
“not know that the saints shall judge the world?” as 
Paul teaches. 3. But I have neither perceived nor 
heard any such thing among you, among whom the 
blessed Paul laboured, who are praised in the 
beginning of his Epistle. For concerning you he 
boasts in all the Churches who then alone had known 
the Lord, for we had not yet known him. 4. There- The 
fore, brethren, I am deeply sorry for him [i.e. Valens] ‘y°stment 
and for his wife, and “may the Lord grant them 
true repentance.” Therefore be yourselves also 
moderate in this matter, and “do not regard such 
men as enemies,” but call them back as fallible and 
straying members, that you may make whole the 
body of you all. For in doing this you edify 
yourselves. 


1 The Greek was perhaps τοῖς οὖσιν ἐν ἀρχῇ ἐπιστολαῖς 
"αὐτοῦ, and ought to be rendered ‘‘ who were his epistles in 
the beginning,” with a reference to IT Cor. 3, 2. 


297 


THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS 


XII 


1. Confido enim vos bene exercitatos esse in sacris 
literis et nihil vos latet; mihi autem non est con- 
cessum, Modo, ut his scripturis dictum est, irascim- 
ini et nolite peccare, et sol non occidat super 

Ps.4,5;  iracundiam vestram. Beatus, qui meminerit ; quod 
Eph. 4, 26 A ‘ 
ego credo esse in vobis. 2. Deus autem et pater 
domini nostri Iesu Christi, et ipse sempiternus 
Heb. 6,20; pontifex, dei filius Iesus Christus, aedificet vos in fide 
: et veritate et in omni mansuetudine et sine iracundia 
et in patientia et in longanimitate et tolerantia et 
castitate ; et det vobis sortem et partem inter 
sanctos suos et nobis vobiscum et omnibus, qui sunt 
sub caelo, qui credituri sunt in dominum nostrum et 
deum! Jesum Christum et in ipsius patrem, qui 
Ga. 1,1 resuscitavit eum a mortuis. 3. Pro omnibus sanctis 
εν Ἢ 1.2 orate. Orate etiam pro regibus et putestatibus et 
Luke 6,27 pYrincipibus atque pro persequentibus et odientibus 
poe aes vos et pro inimicis crucis, ut fructus vester manifestus 


1 Tim. 4,15 sit in omnibus, ut sitis in illo perfecti. 
James 1, 4 


XIII 


A 3 4 
1. Ἐμγράψατέ μοι καὶ ὑμεῖς καὶ Ιγνάτιος, ἵν᾽, 
> J e fa) 
ἐάν τις ἀπέρχηται eis Συρίαν, καὶ τὰ παρ᾽ ὑμῶν 


1 Ht deum is omitted by some of the MSS of L. . 
2 The Greek is here again available from the quotation in 
Eusebius. 


298 


POLYCARP TO THE PHILIPPIANS, xu. 1-xu1. 1 


ΧΙ 


1. For I am confident that you are well versed in The need of 

the Scriptures,! and from you nothing is hid ; but to "8" 
me this is not granted. Only, as it is said in these 
Scriptures, “ Be ye angry and sin not,’ and “ Let 
not the sun go down upon your wrath.” Blessed is 
the man who remembers-this, and I believe that it is 
so with you. 2. Now may God and the Father of our Prayer for 
Lord Jesus Christ, and the “eternal Priest” himself, "!*#!"% 
Jesus Christ, the Son of God, build you up in faith 
and truth, and in all gentleness, and without wrath, 
and in patience, and in longsuffering, and endurance, 
and purity, and may he give you lot and part with 
his saints, and to us with you, and to all under heaven 
who shall believe in our Lord and God Jesus Christ 
and in his “ Father who raised him from the dead.” 
3. “ Pray for all the saints. Pray also for the 
Emperors,” 2 and for potentates, and princes, and 
for “ those who persecute you and hate you,” and for 
“the enemies of the Cross” that “ your fruit may be 
manifest among all men, that you may be perfected” 
in him. 


XITI 


1. Born you and Ignatius wrote to me that if 
anyone was going to Syria he should also take your 


1 Probably this ought to be regarded as a quotation from 
the letter of the Philippians to Polycarp. 

2 Pro regibus is‘no doubt a translation of ὑπὲρ βασιλέων 
and βασιλεύς is regularly used as the title of the Emperor. 


299 


THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS - 


ἀποκομίσῃ γράμματα" ὅπορ ποιήσω, ἐὰν λάβω 
καιρὸν εὔθετον, εἴτε ἐγώ, εἴτε bY πέμπω ' πρε- 
σβεύσοντα καὶ περὶ ὑμῶν. 2. τὰς ἐπιστολὰς 
᾿Ιγνατίου τὰς ͵πεμφθείσας ἡμῖν ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ καὶ 
ἄλλας, ὅσας εἴχομεν παρ᾽ ἡμῖν, ἐπέμψαμεν t ὑμῖν, 
καθὼς ἐνετείλασθε" αἵτινες ὑποτεταγμέναι εἰσὶν 
τῇ ἐπιστολῇ ταύτῃ, ἐξ ὧν μεγάλα ὠφεληθῆναι 
δυνήσεσθε. περιέχουσι γὰρ πίστιν Kar v ὑπομονὴν 
καὶ πᾶσαν οἰκοδομὴν τὴν εἰς τὸν κύριον ἡμῶν 
ἀνήκουσαν. Et de ipso Ignatio et de his, qui cum 
eo sunt, quod certius agnoveritis, significate. 


XIV 


Haec vobis scripsi per Crescentem, quem in 
praesenti commendavi vobis et nunc ‘commendo. 
Conversatus est enim nobiscum inculpabiliter ; credo 
quia et vobiscum similiter. Sororem autem eius 
habebitis commendatam, cum venerit ad vos. In- 
columes estote in domino Iesu Christo in gratia cum 
omnibus vestris. Amen. 


1 πέμπω Eus. misero (= πέμψω) L. 


300 


POLYCARP TO THE PHILIPPIANS, xu. 1-x1v. 1 


letters. I will do this if I have a convenient oppor- Ignatius 