Hermas, The Shepherd, Similitudes 9–10 (Sim. 9.29–10.4), incl. the Latin of 9.30.3–9.33.3 and of Similitude 10.
Kirsopp Lake, The Apostolic Fathers II (Loeb 1912/1913), Internet Archive OCR (djvu.txt) excerpt from https://archive.org/details/apostolicfathers02lakeuoft


ἑαυτῶν τὴν πονηρίαν, ἐνδύσησθε δὲ τὴν ἀκακίαν' 
πρῶτοι πάντων ζήσεσθε τῷ θεῷ. 4. μετὰ τὰ 
συντελέσαι αὐτὸν τὰς παραβολὰς τῶν ὀρέων 
λέγω αὐτῷ: Κύριε, νῦν μοι δήλωσον περὶ τῶν 
λίθων τῶν ἠρμένων ἐκ τοῦ πεδίου καὶ εἰς τὴν 
οἰκοδομὴν τεθειμένων ἀντὶ τῶν λίθων τῶν ἡρμένων 
ἐκ τοῦ πύργου, καὶ τῶν στρογγύλων τῶν τε- 
θέντων εἰς τὴν οἰκοδομήν, καὶ τῶν ἔτι στρογγύλων 
ὄντων. 


XXX 


» / \ \ / 4 e 
1. "Axove, φησί, καὶ περὶ τούτων πάντων. οἱ 
ra / ᾽ 7 \ ᾽ 
λίθοι οἱ τοῦ πεδίου ἠἡρμένοι καὶ τεθειμένοι εἰς 
4 n / » \ an 
τὴν οἰκοδομὴν τοῦ πύργου ἀντὶ τῶν ἀποβεβλημέ- 
/ “ »“ -“ r 
νων, αἱ ῥίζαι εἰσὶ τοῦ ὄρους τοῦ λευκοῦ.2 2. ἐπεὶ 
e lal 9, -“ fal 
οὖν οἱ πιστεύσαντες, ἐκ TOU ὄρους τοῦ λευκοῦ 
1 πάνταγάρ. .. αὐτῷ AFL, om. L,. 
2 λευκοῦ P24, λευκοῦ τούτου AL. 


288 


a ᾿ 
4 


THE SHEPHERD, sim. 1x. xxix. 1-xxx. 2 





babes, and no evil enters into their heart, nor have 
they known what wickedness is, but have ever 
‘remained in innocence. 2. Such then shall live 
without doubt in the kingdom of God, because by no 
_act did they defile the ΗΘ ΕΈΘΟΕ τὰ of God, but 
remained in innocence all the days of their lives in 
the same mind. 3. All of you, then, as many as shall 
continue,’ said he, “and shall be as babes, with no 
wickedness, shall be more glorious than all those 
who have been mentioned before, for all babes 
are glorious before God, and are in the first place 
by him. Blessed then are you who put away 
evil from yourselves, and put on guiltlessness, for 
you shall be the first of all to live to God.” 4. But The stones 
after he had finished the parable of the moun- the aaa 
tains I said to him: “Sir, now explain to me about 
the stones which were taken out of the _ plain, 
and put into the building instead of the stones which 
were taken away from the tower, and the round 
stones which were put into the building, and those 
which are still round.” 


XXX 


1. “ Listen also,” he said, “ concerning all these. 
The stones that are taken from the plain and put into 
the building of the tower instead of those which are 
rejected, are the roots of the white mountain. 
2. Since then all the believers from the white 


289 


VOL. II. U 


Eph. 4, 29 


THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS 


πάντες ἄκακοι εὑρέθησαν, ἐκέλευσεν ὁ κύριος TOD 
πύργου τούτους ἐκ τῶν ῥιζῶν] τοῦ ὄρους τούτου 
βληθῆναι εἰς τὴν οἰκοδομὴν τοῦ πύργου: ἔγνω 
γάρ, ὅτι, ἐὰν ἀπέλθωσιν εἰς τὴν οἰκοδομὴν τοῦ 
πύργου οἱ λίθοι οὗτοι, διαμενοῦσι λαμπροὶ καὶ. 
οὐδεὶς αὐτῶν μελανήσει.Σ 3. Quodsi de ceter , 
montibus adiecisset, necesse habuisset rursus visitai ;; 
eam turrem atque purgare. Hi autem omnes car _ 
didi inventi sunt, πιστεύσαντες Kal οἱ μέλλοντες 
πιστεύειν: ἐκ τοῦ αὐτοῦ γὰρ γένους εἰσίν. pa- 
κάριον τὸ γένος τοῦτο, ὅτι ἄκακόν ἐστιν. 4. 
ἄκουε νῦν καὶ περὶ τῶν λίθων τῶν στρογγύλων 
καὶ λαμπρῶν. καὶ αὐτοὶ πάντες ἐκ τοῦ ὄρους τοῦ 
λευκοῦ εἰσίν. Audi autem, quare rotundi sunt 
reperti. Divitiae suae eos pusillum obscuraverunt 
a veritate atque obfuscaverunt, a deo vero nun- 
quam recesserunt, nec ullum verbum malum pro- 
cessit de ore eorum, sed omnis aequitas et virtus 
veritatis. 5. Horum ergo mentem cum vidisset 
dominus posse eos veritati favere, bonos quoque 
permanere, iussit opes eorum circumcidi, non enim 
in totum eorum tolli, ut possint aliquid boni 
facere de eo, quod eis relictum est, et vivent deo, 
quoniam ex bono genere sunt. Ideo ergo pusillum 
circumcisi sunt et positi sunt in structuram turris 
huius. 


1 τῶν ῥιζῶν LE, om. A. 

2 At this point A ends, as the last leaf is missing. The 
Latin text which follows is that of L,. The few verses in 
Greek are from P2™, Some words have been restored as the 
Papyrus is in bad condition, but the reconstructions are 
almost certain. 


290 








THE SHEPHERD, sim. 1x. xxx. 2-5 


mountain were found guiltless, the lord of the tower 
commanded these to be brought from the roots of 
this mountain for the building of the tower. For 
he knew that if these stones go into the building 
tof the tower they will remain bright and none of 


-them will become black. 3. But if he had added 
-Shem from the other mountains he would have been 


obliged to visit the tower again, and to purge it, 
‘for all these have been found white, both past and 
future believers, for they are of the same race. 
Blessed is this race, because it isinnocent. 4. Listen 
now concerning the round and bright stones. They 
also are all from this white mountain. Listen then 
why they have been found round. Their riches 
have hidden them a little from the truth and 
darkened them, but they have never departed from 
God, nor has any evil word proceeded from their 
mouth, but all equity and virtue of truth. 5. When 
therefore the Lord saw their minds, that they are 
able to favour the truth and to remain good, he 
commanded their wealth to be cut down, yet not to 
be wholly taken away from them, that they may 
be able to do some good with that which was lett 
them, and they shall live to God because they are of 
a good kind. Therefore they were cut down a little, 
and placed in the building of this tower. 


THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS 


XXXI 


1. Ceteri vero, qui adhuc rotundi remanserunt 
neque aptati sunt in eam structuram, quia nondum 
acceperunt sigillum, repositi sunt suo loco; valde 
enim rotundi reperti sunt. 2. Oportet autem cir- 
cumcidi hoc saeculum ab illis et vanitates opum 
suarum, et tunc convenient in dei regnum. Necesse 
est enim eos intrare in dei regnum ; hoc enim genus 
innocuum benedixit dominus. Ex hoc ergo genere 
non intercidet quisquam. Etenim licet quis eorum 
temptatus a nequissimo diabolo aliquid deliquerit, 
cito recurret ad dominum suum. 3. Felices vos 
iudico omnes, ego nuntius paenitentiae, quicumque 
estis innocentes sicut infantes, quoniam pars vestra 
bona est et honorata apud deum. 4. Dico autem 
omnibus, vobis, quicumque sigillum hoe accepistis, 
simplicitatem habere neque offensarum memores esse 
neque in malitia vestra permanere aut in memoria 
offensarum amaritudinis, in unum quemqgue spiritum 
fieri et has malas scissuras permediare ac tollere a 
vobis, ut dominus pecorum gaudeat de his.! 5. 
χαρήσεται δέ, ἐὰν πάντα ὑγιῆ εὑρεθῇ, καὶ μὴ 
διαπτεπτωκότα ἐξ αὐτῶν. ἐὰν δὲ εὑρεθῇ τινα ἐξ 
αὐτῶν διαπεπτωκότα, οὐαὶ τοῖς ποιμέσιν ἔσται. 
6. ἐὰν δὲ καὶ αὐτοὶ οἱ ποιμένες εὑρεθῶσι δια- 
πεπτωκότες, τί ἐροῦσι τῷ δεσπότῃ τοῦ ποιμνίου; 
ὅτι ἀπὸ τῶν προβάτων διέπεσαν; οὐ πιστευ- 
θήσονται: ἄπιστον γὰρ πρᾶγμά ἐστι ποιμένα 
ὑπὸ προβάτων παθεῖν τι' μᾶλλον δὲ κολασ- 


1 The Greek which follows is a quotation preserved in 
Antiochus. 


292 





THE SHEPHERD, sim. 1x. xxxi. 1-6 


XXXI. 


1, “ Bor the others which still remained round and The round 
were not fitted into the building, because they hi: ad: 
not yet received the seal, were put back in their place, 
for they were found very round. 2. But this world 
and the vanities of their riches must be cut away from 
them, and then they will be meet for the kingdom 
of God. For they needs must ‘enter into the kingdom 
of God’; for the Lord blessed this innocent kind. 
Therefore not one of this kind shall perish, for 
though one of them be tempted by the most wicked 
devil, and do some wrong, he will quickly return to 
his Lord. 3. I, the angel of repentance, judge you 
all happy who are innocent as babes, for your part is 
good and honourable with God. 4. But I say to 
you all, as many as have received the seal, keep 
simplicity and bear no malice, and do not remain in 
your guilt, or in remembrance of the bitterness of 
offences. Be of one spirit and put away these evil 
schisms, and take them away from yourselves that 
the lord of the sheep may rejoice over them. 5. But 
he will rejoice if all be found whole; but if he find 
some of them fallen away, it will be woe to the 
shepherds. 6. But if the shepherds themselves be 
found fallen away, what shall they answer to the 
Master of the flock? That they have fallen away 
because of the sheep? They will not be believed, 
for it is incredible that a shepherd should be harmed 


293 


THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS 


θήσονται διὰ TO ψεῦδος αὐτῶν. Et ego sum 
pastor, et validissime oportet me de vobis reddere 
rationem. 


XXXII 


1. Remediate ergo vos, dum adhuc turris aedifi- 
eatur. 2. Dominus habitat in viris amantibus pacem; 
ei enimvero pax cara est; a litigiosis vero et perditis 
malitiae longe abest. Reddite igitur ei spiritum 
integrum, sicut accepistis. 3. Si enim dederis fulloni 
vestimentum novum integrum idque integrum iterum 
vis recipere, fullo autem scissum tibi illud reddet, 
recipies illud? Nonne statim scandesces! et eum 
convicio persequeris, dicens: Vestimentum integrum 
tibi dedi; quare scidisti illud et inutile redegisti ? 
Et propter scissuram, quam in eo fecisti, in usu esse 
non potest. Nonne haec omnia verba dices fulloni 
ergo et de scissura, quam in vestimento tuo fecerit ?? 
4, Si sic igitur tu doles de vestimento tuo et quereris, 
quod non illud integrum recipias, quid putas dom- 
inum tibi facturum, qui spiritum integrum tibi dedit, 
et tu eum totum inutilem redegisti, ita ut in nullo 
usu esse possit domino suo? Inutilis enim esse 
coepit usus eius, cum sit corruptus a te. Nonne 
igitur dominus spiritus eius propter hoc factum tuum 
morte te adficiet? 5. Plane, inquam, omnes 608, 


1 Scandescis L,, irasceris L,. 

2 A great part of this paragraph is found in Greek in 
Antiochus, but he seems here to abbreviate and perhaps to 
paraphrase too much to render it wise to follow his text. 


294 


THE SHEPHERD, sim. 1x. xxxi. 6—xxxii. 5 


by the sheep, and they will rather be punished for 
their lie. And I am the shepherd, and am very 
exceedingly bound to give account for you. 


XXXII 


1. “ THEreEroreE,amend yourselves while the tower The final 
is still being built. 2. The Lord dwells among men who ΟΣ ποτ λεῖοι 
love peace, for of a truth peace is dear to him, but he shepherd 
is far away from the contentious and those who are 
destroyed by malice. Give back then to him your spirit 
whole as you received it. 3. For if you give to the 
dyer a new garment whole, and wish to receive it 
back from him whole, but the dyer gives it you back 
torn, will you accept it? Will you not at once 
grow hot! and pursue him with abuse, saying ‘I gave 
you a whole garment, why have you torn it and 
given it me back useless? And because of the tear 
which you have made in it it cannot be used.’ 

Will you not say all these things to the dyer about 
the rent which he has made in your garment? 4. If 
then you are grieved with your garment, and com- 
plain that you did not receive it back whole, what do 
you think the Lord will doto you, who gave you the 
spirit whole, and you have returned it altogether 
useless, so that it can be of no use to its Lord, for its 
use began to be useless when it had been corrupted 
by you. Will not therefore the Lord of that spirit 
punish you with death, because of this deed of 
yours?” 95, “Certainly,” said I, “He will punish 


1 Scandesco is probably a dialectic form of candesco, which 
is found in some MSS of L,. 


295 


THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS 


quoscumque invenerit in memoria offensarum per- 
manere, adficiet. Clementiam, inquit, eius calcare 
nolite, sed potius honorificate eum, quod tam patiens 
est ad delicta vestra et non est sicut vos. Agite 
enim paenitentiam utilem vobis. 


XXXII 


1. Haee omnia, quae supra scripta sunt, ego pastor 
nuntius paenitentiae ostendi et locutus sum dei 
servis. Si credideritis ergo et audieritis verba mea 
et ambulaveritis in his et correxeritis itinera vestra, 
vivere poteritis. Sin autem permanseritis in malitia 
et memoria offensarum, nullus ex huiusmodi vivet 
deo. Haec omnia a me dicenda dicta sunt vobis. 
2. Ait mihi ipse pastor: Omnia a me interrogasti? 
Et dixi: Ita, domine. Quare ergo non interrogasti 
me de forma lapidum in structura repositorum, quod 
explevimus formas? Et dixi: Oblitus sum, domine. 
3. Audi nunc, inquit, de 1115. Hi sunt qui nunc 
mandata mea audierunt et ex totis praecordiis 
egerunt paenitentiam. Cumque vidisset dominus 
bonam atque puram esse paenitentiam eorum et 
posse eos in ea permanere, iussit priora peccata 
eorum deleri. Hae enim formae peccata erant 
eorum, et exaequata sunt, ne apparerent. . 


296 


THE SHEPHERD, sim. 1x. xxxii. 5-xxxiii. 3 


all those whom he finds keeping the memory of 
offences.” “ Do not then,” said he, “ trample on his 
mercy, but rather honour him that he is so patient 
to your offences and is not as you are. Repent 
therefore with the repentance that avails you. 


ἐξ: 
XXXITI 


1. “ Att these things which have been written 
above I, the shepherd, the angel of repentance, have 
declared and spoken to the servants of God. If then 
you shall believe and shall listen to my words 
and shall wall in them, and shall correct your 
ways, you shall be able to live. But if you shall 
remain in malice and in the memory of offences, 
none of such kind shall live to God. All these things 
that I must tell have been told to you.” 2. The 
shepherd himself said to me, “ Have you asked me 
about everything?” And I said: “ Yes, Sir,’ “ Why 
then did you not ask me about the marks of the 
stones which were placed in the building, why we 
filled up the marks?” And I said: “I forgot, Sir.” 
3. “Listen now,’ said he, “about them. These 
are those who heard my commandments, and re- 
pented with all their hearts. And when the Lord 
saw that their repentance was good and pure, and 
that they could remain in it, he commanded their 
former sins to be blotted out. For these marks were 
their sins, and they were made level that they shoe 
not appear.’ 


297 


THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS 


SimILirupo X 


I 


1. Postquam perscripseram librum hune, venit 
nuntius ille, qui me tradiderat huic pastori, in domum, 
in qua eram, et consedit supra lectum, et adstitit ad 
dexteram hic pastor. Deinde vocavit me et haee 
mihi dixit: 2. Tradidi te, inquit, et domum tuam 
huic pastori, ut ab eo protegi possis. Ita, inquam, 
domine. Si vis ergo protegi, inquit, ab omni 
vexatione et ab omni _ saevitia, successum autem 
habere in omni opere bono atque verbo et omnem 
virtutem aequitatis, in mandatis huius ingredere, 
quae dedi tibi, et poteris dominari omni nequitiae. 
3. Custodienti enim tibi mandata huius subiecta erit— 
omnis cupiditas et dulcedo saeculi huius, successus 
vero in omni bono negotio te sequetur. Maturitatem 
huius et modestiam suscipe in te et dic omnibus, in 
magno honore esse eum et dignitate apud dominum 
et magnae potestatis eum praesidem esse et potentem 
in officio suo. Huic soli per totum orbem paeni- 
tentiae potestas tributa est. Potensne tibi videtur 
esse? Sed vos maturitatem huius et verecundiam, 
quam in vos habet, despicitis. 


{i 


1. Dico ei: Interroga ipsum, domine, ex quo in 
domo mea est, an aliquid extra ordinem fecerim, ex 


298 





7 


THE SHEPHERD, sim. x. i. 1-ii. 1 


PARABLE 10 


I 


1. Arrer I had written this book the angel who 
hei handed me over to the shepherd came to the 
house in which I was, and sat on the couch, and the 
shepherd stood on his right hand. Then he called 
me and said to me: 2. “I have handed you over,’ 
said he, “ and your house to this shepherd, that you 
may be protected by him.” “Yes, Sir,” said 1. 
“If then,” said he, “ you wish to be protected from 
all vexation and all cruelty, and to have success in 
every good work and word, and every virtue of 
righteousness, walk in his commandments, which he 
gave you, and you will be able to overcome all wicked- 
ness. 3. For, if you keep his commandments, all the 
lusts and delight of this world will be subject to you, 
but success in every good undertaking will follow 
you. Take his perfection! and moderation? upon you, 
and say to all that he is in great honour and dignity 
with the Lord, and that he is set in great power and 
powerful in his office. To him alone throughout all the 
world is given the power of repentance. Does he not 
seem to you to be powerful? But you despise his per- 
fection and the modesty which he has towards you.” 


II 


1. I sarp to him: “ Ask him himself, Sir, whether 
since he has been in my house I have done anything 


1 Literally ‘ripeness.’ 
? A translation either of σωφροσύνη or of εὐταξία Ξε propriety 
of conduct, a word specially used by the Stoics. 


299 


The final 
vision of 
the Angel 


Acts 2, 11 


THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS 


quo eum offenderim. 2. Et ego, inquit, scio nihil 
extra ordinem fecisse te neque esse facturum. Et 
ideo haec loquor tecum, ut perseveres. Bene enim 
de te hic apud me existimavit. Tu autem ceteris 
haec verba dices, ut et illi, qui egerunt aut acturi 
sunt paenitentiam, eadem quae tu sentiant et hic 
apud me de his bene interpretetur et ego apud 
dominum. 3. Et ego, inquam, domine, omni homini 
indico magnalia domini; spero autem, quia omnes, 
qui antea peccaverunt, si haec audiant, libenter 
acturi sunt paenitentiam vitam recuperantes. 4. 
Permane ergo, inquit, in hoc ministerio et consumma 
illud. Quicumque autem mandata huius efficiunt, 
habebunt vitam, et hic apud dominum magnum 
honorem. Quicumque vero huius mandata non ser- 
vant, fugiunt a sua vita et illum adversus!; nec 
mandata eius sequuntur, sed morti se tradunt et 
unusquisque eorum reus fit sanguinis sui. Tibi 
autem dico, ut servias mandatis his, et remedium 
peccatorum habebis. 


ΠῚ 


1. Misi autem tibi has virgines, αὖ habitent tecum ; 
vidi enim eas affabiles tibi esse. Habes ergo eas 
adiutrices, quo magis possis huius mandata servare ; 
non potest enim fieri, ut sine his virginibus haec 
mandata serventur. Video autem eas libenter esse 
tecum; sed ego praecipiam eis, ut omnino a domo 


1 Hilgenfeld emends to ‘‘aversantur illum? 


300 





THE SHEPHERD, si. x. ii. 1-iii. 1 


against his command, to offend against him?” 2. “I 
know myself,’ said he, “that you have done 
nothing and will do nothing against his command, 
and therefore 1 am speaking thus with you, that 
you may persevere; for he has given me a good 
account of you. But you shall tell these words 
to others, that they also who have repented, 
or shall repent, may have the same mind as you, 
and that he may give a good account to me 
of them, and 1 to the Lord.” 3. “I myself, Sir,” 
said I, “show the ‘mighty acts’ of the Lord to all 
men, but I hope that all who have sinned before, if 
they hear this, will willingly repent, and recover 
life.” 4. “ Remain then,” said he, “in this ministry 
and carry it out. But whoever perform his command- 
ments shall have life, and sucha one has great honour 
with the Lord. But whoever do not keep his com- 
mands, are flying from their own life and against 
him, and they do not keep his commandments, but 
are delivering themselves to death, and each one of 
them is guilty of his own blood. But you I bid to keep 
these commandments, and you shall have healing 
for your sins. 


Ill 


1. “ Bur I sent these maidens to you to dwell with Hermas and 
you, for I saw that they were courteous to you. You ®™#!4ens 
have them therefore to help you, in order to keep his 
commandments the better, for it is not possible that 
these commandments be kept without these maidens. 

I see moreover that they are with you willingly ; but 
I will enjoin on them not to depart at all from your 


301 


Acts 2,1 


THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS 


tua non discedant. 2. Tu tantum communda domum 
tuam; in munda enim domo libenter habitabunt ; 
mundae enim sunt atque castae et industriae et 
omnes habentes gratiam apud dominum. Igitur si 


habuerint domum tuam puram, tecum permanebunt._ 


Sin autem pusillum aliquid inquinationis acciderit, 
protinus a domo tua_ recedent; hae enim 
virgines nullum omnino diligunt inquinationem. 
3. Dico ei: Spero me, domine, placiturum eis, 
ita ut in domo mea libenter habitent semper. 
Kal ὥσπερ οὗτος, ᾧ παρέδωκάς με, οὐ μέμ- 
φεταί με, οὐδὲ αὗται μέμψονταί με. 4. λέγει 
τῷ ποιμένι: Οἶδα, ὅτε ὁ δοῦλος τοῦ θεοῦ 
θέλει ζῆν καὶ τηρήσει τὰς ἐντολὰς ταύτας 
καὶ τὰς παρθένους ἐν καθαρότητι καταστήσει. 
5. ταῦτα εἰπὼν τῷ ποιμένεν πάλιν παρέ- 
δωκέν pe καὶ τὰς παρθένους καλέσας... .. 
λέγει αὐταῖς" Quoniam video vos libenter in domo 
huius habitare, commendo eum vobis et domum eius, 
ut a domo eius non recedatis omnino. Illae vero 
haec verba libenter audierunt. 


Ιν 


1. Ait deinde mihi: Viriliter in ministerio hoc 
conversare, omni homini indica magnalia domini, et 
habebis gratiam in hoc ministerio. Quicumque ergo 
in his mandatis ambulaverit, vivet et felix erit in 
vita sua; quicumque vero neglexerit, non vivet et 
erit infelix in vita sua. 2. Dic omnibus, ut non 


1 The Greek is from P°* (Oxyrynchus Papyr. 404). 
302 





THE SHEPHERD, sm. x. iii. 1-iv. 2 


house. 2. Only do you make your house pure, for 
in a pure house they will willingly dwell, for they 
are pure and chaste and industrious and all have 
favour with the Lord. Ifthen they find your house 
pure they will remain with you. But if ever so little 
corruption come to it they will at once depart from 
your home, for these maidens love no sort of impurity.” 
3. I said to him: “I hope, Sir, that I shall please 
them so that they may ever willingly dwell in my 
house. And just as he, to whom you handed me 
over, finds no fault in me, so they also shall find no 
faultin me.” 4. He said tothe shepherd: “I know 
that the servant of God wishes to live, and wil! keep 
these commandments, and will provide for the 
maidens in purity.” 5. When he had said this he 
handed me over again to the shepherd, and called 
the maidens and said to them: “ Since I see that 
you willingly dwell in his house I commend him 
and his house to you, that you depart not at 
all from his house.” But they heard these words 
willingly. 


IV 


1. Tuen he said to me: “ Behave manfully in this 
ministry, show to every man the ‘ mighty acts’ of the 
Lord, and you shall have favour in this ministry. 
Whoever therefore shall walk in these command- 
ments shall live, and shall be happy in his life; but 
whoever shall neglect them shall not live, and shall 
be unhappy in his life. 2. Say to all men who are 


393 


THE APOSTOLIC FATHERS 


cessent, quicumque recte facere possunt; bona 
opera exercere utile est illis. Dico autem, omnem 
hominem de incommodis eripi oportere. Et is enim, 
qui eget et in cotidiana vita patitur incommoda, in 
magno tormento est ac necessitate. 3. Qui igitur 
huiusmodi animam eripit de necessitate, magnum 
gaudium sibi adquirit. Is enim, qui huiusmodi 
vexatur incommodo, pari tormento cruciatur atque 
torquet se qui in vincula est. Multi enim propter 
huiusmodi calamitates, cum eas sufferre non possunt, 
mortem sibi adducunt. Qui novit igitur calamitatem 
huiusmodi hominis et non eripit eum, magnum 
peccatum admittit et reus fit sanguinis eius. 4. 
Facite igitur opera bona, quicumque accepistis a 
domino, ne, dum tardatis facere, consummetur 
structura turris. Propter vos enim intermissum est 
opus aedificationis eius. Nisi festinetis igitur facere 
recte, consummabitur turris, et excludemini. 5. 
Postquam vero locutus est mecum, surrexit de lecto 
et apprehenso pastore et virginibus abiit, dicens 
autem mihi, remissurum se pastorem illum et virgines 
in domum meam. 


304 


THE SHEPHERD, sm. x. iv. 2-5 

able to do right,! that they cease not; the exer- 
cise of good deeds is profitable to them. But I say 
that every man ought to be taken out from distress, 
for he who is destitute and suffers distress in his 
‘daily life is in great anguish and necessity. 3. Who- 
“ever therefore rescues the soul of such a man from 
necessity gains great joy for himself. For he who is 
‘vexed by such distress is tortured with such 
anguish as he suffers who is in chains. For many 
bring death on themselves by reason of such 
calamities when they cannot bear them. Whoever 
therefore knows the distress of such a man, and does 
‘not rescue him, incurs great sin and becomes guilty 
of his blood. 4. Therefore do good deeds, all you 
who have learnt of the Lord, lest the building of 
the tower be finished while you delay to do them. 
For the work of the building has been broken off for 
